•The Stawski Family              
  | 3 The Stawski Family This chapter is an extension of the PAPPE chapter because it is about the Stawski cousins of our Pappe grandmother, Ethel Pappe Schwartz and their extended relatives. The connection between the Stawski family and the Pappe family was established when Bashkeh Pappe, the sister of Ethel’s father, Rav Yisrael Yitschak Pappe, married Ephrayim Stawski in Antopol. Although we are not directly related to most of the Stawskis included in this chapter, researching their lives rewarded us with invaluable information about the Pappe side of the family, and enhanced our understanding of family life in Antopol. We gained a profound respect for the tenacity of the Stawski family members to survive and we share infinite sympathy for the horror and tragedy that the family endured during the Holocaust. When researching the Pappe family’s origins in Antopol, Dvorah Netzer, frequently referred to The Antopol Yizkor Book: Shards of Memory: Messages from the Lost Shtetl of Antopol.1 This memorial book, dedicated to the citizens of Antopol who perished in the Holocaust, is a compilation of biographies, stories, poems and sketches of life in Antopol and first published in 1972. It is written in Hebrew, Yiddish and English by survivors who were born and raised there. In the pages of this book, we discovered anecdotes about the siblings of Rav Yisrael Yitschak Pappe: Yankel Pappe and Bashkeh Pappe Stawski, Two of Bashkeh’s brothers-in-law through the Stawski family gained prominence after they immigrated to Eretz Yisrael: Moshe Stavi was a prolific writer and Pinchas Czerniak was a brilliant doctor of nuclear medicine. While examining documents pertaining to the history of these two men’s lives, Dvorah Netzer was excited to discover direct links to present-day Stawski relatives. Through tenacious research and persistent phone calls, Dvorah connected with three living relatives of the Stawski family: Luba Bar Menachem in Jerusalem, Terry Stawsky Marshall, and Terry’s daughter Randye and son-in-law, Martin Friedrichs who all live in New York. (Note: The original spelling of the family name was changed to Stawsky by some family members residing in the United States.) Luba shared detailed family letters written to Moshe Stavi in either Yiddish or Hebrew. Terry, Randye and Martin shared old photographs and their personal genealogical findings with us. Their help and that of their extended families, combined with our own archival research, allowed us to piece together not only the fascinating story of the Stawski family but also helped us discover connections to the lives of our Pappe family members who remained in Antopol. The Stawskis’ contributions have been indispensable in helping us to create this cohesive narrative about the family. The extended Stawski family is quite large with members living around the globe, specifically in Israel, Argentina and the USA. The branch portrayed in this chapter constitutes a small portion of this family – the part which is connected to our Pappe family. We dedicate this chapter as a memorial to the large segment of the Stawski family from Antopol who perished in the Holocaust. 1 Hebrew Version: Benzion H. Ayalon, editor. Antopol (Antepolie) Yizkor Book, (Tel Aviv, Antopol Committee in Israel, Assisted by The Antepoiler Yizkor Book Committee in the USA, 1972). English Version: Alicia Esther Goldberg, editor, translated by Nathan Snyder, Shards of Memory: Messages from the Lost Shtetl of Antopol, Belarus, Translation of the Yizkor (Memorial) Book of the Jewish Community of Antopol, (New York: JewishGen, Inc, 2014). 4 |                    
  | 5 •GEOGRAPHICAL ORIGINS OF THE STAWSKI FAMILY he Stawski family origins may have had roots in the town of Stavisk or Stawiski, Poland. It is possible that their original name was Stawisky. In fact, there is a large Stawski family living in the area around Antopol, Belarus, which is about 250 kilometers from Stawiski. The map below shows the modern names of towns to which our Stawski branch family members traveled or where they lived or died. If the names differ from the historical spelling used in this chapter, an update of the name will be noted parenthetically within the text. •YAAKOV SHMUEL STAWSKI (1845-1937) The thread of this branch of the Stawski family history leads back to Yaakov Shmuel Stawski, son of Gershon Hirsh. Yaakov Shmuel lived in Antopol most of his life. He was a grain merchant who owned a flour mill. In a document dated 1887 listing the Jewish owners of linen-processing factories in Belarus (posted on jewishgen.org by Yuri Dorn), we learned that Yaakov Shmuel employed four workers in a linseed (flax) oil factory in Antopol that he had owned since 1865. Not only was he a successful businessman, but Yaakov Shmuel was an educated man with a sharp intellect. He was soft spoken and known for his ability to resolve difficult situations in his hometown. Even at the age of 81, Yaakov Shmuel was deeply involved in the Jewish community, serving as one of the two gabbais of the central “Homa” Synagogue and Talmud Torah in Antopol. He shared this position with Rav Avraham Shub from the start of the synagogue’s construction in 1926 (5686) until its opening two years later, if not longer. Yaakov Shmuel’s first wife, Shifra, died in childbirth around 1868, but their son Michael survived. Yaakov Shmuel quickly remarried, eventually giving Michael five other siblings. His second wife, Chaya Rivka (Riva) Ida Lifshitz (unk.-1923), was the daughter of Ephrayim Lifshitz, one of the most prominent and successful individuals in Antopol and its surroundings. She was known to everyone as Riva. Riva managed the family’s flour mill. When Yaakov Shmuel’s linseed oil factory burned down in 1890, he moved to Kremenchug (Kremenchuk in modern Ukraine), where he started another business as a grain merchant. After he was settled in his new home, Yaakov Shmuel brought Riva and the younger children to join him. Kremenchug’s central location allowed him to travel all over the country to sell his wares. In his new hometown, Yaakov Shmuel became a prominent supporting member of the Jewish community. Riva worked alongside him as his partner in all his endeavors. From a letter written to his son, Moshe Stavi, on December 4, 1922, we discovered that Yaakov Shmuel was no longer earning a living. In the letter, he thanks Moshe for the money that he sent him. Yaakov Shmuel explains that he needed the financial support badly because most of the money in his account in Kremenchug had been frozen by the Russians. The small sum of money he had been able to recover from the bank in Kremenchug had gone to feeding the members of his household. Yaakov Shmuel concludes the letter by revealing that he is now in debt. The original letter is reproduced in the appendix. In another letter written to his son Gershon, Yaakov Shmuel asks him to send the family pearls, diamonds and rings, which Yaakov Shmuel had given him for safekeeping, to Moshe in Palestine. Moshe could sell them at a good price and send the proceeds to Yaakov Shmuel in Antopol. This request was repeated later in another letter. The contents of these letters reveal to us that during his early career, Yaakov Present-day map of Eastern European cities mentioned in this chapter. Yaakov Shmuel Stawski ca. 1905 Chaya Rivka (Riva) Stawski Antopol Kobryn 6 |                    
  | 7 Shmuel converted his business profits into jewels, which might provide a more reliable source of money in the future. In several letters and postcards, Yaakov Shmuel thanks Moshe for the financial support he has sent and asks for additional help. When he traveled to Antopol for business, Yaakov Shmuel always stayed with his daughter Tsivya, keeping the family ties strong. Finally, in the beginning of the 1920s, the family moved back to Antopol, along with other Polish citizens who fled Russian-ruled Kremenchug. When Riva died in 1923, Yaakov Shmuel wrote a postcard to his son Moshe to announce her death and tell him how difficult it was to live without her. The postcard is unfortunately too damaged to reproduce here. Yaakov Shmuel lived with Tsivya until his own death in 1937. •1. MICHAEL STAWSKI (CA.1868-1915) Michael was Yaakov Shmuel’s only child with his first wife Shifra, who died in childbirth. As an adult, Michael moved to Kobrin (Kobryn in modern Belarus), west of Antopol. He, too, was married twice. He had two daughters with his first wife, whose name is unknown. Michael had two more daughters with his second wife, Esther Hadassah (Hudes) Gewirtzman (1876-1941). Michael died at the age of 47 of causes unknown to us. Esther was murdered by the Nazis. Yaakov Shmuel Stawski, ca. 1920 DESCENDANTS OF YAAKOV SHMUEL STAWSKI Chaya Rivka Riva (Ida) Lifshitz - 1923 d: Antopol Dov Ber Stawski 1881 - 1941 b: Antopol d: Babi Yar Ida Tubert d: Unknown Moshe StawskiStavi 1884 - 1964 b: Antopol d: Tel Aviv Rosa (Anna) Lebensbaum (Margolin) d: NY Rina Grabelsky 1892 - 1969 Pinchas Philip Stawski 1886 - 1979 b: Antopol d: NY Bessie Chesler 1901 - 1965 b: Kovno d: NY Eugenia (Genia) Golda Stawski 1891 - 1961 Wolf Levin 1886 - 1952 d: Stavropol Yaakov Shmuel Stawski 1845 - 1937 b: Brest Litowsk d: Antopol Shifra - 1880 d: Antopol Michael Stawski - 1915 b: Antopol Not Known Esther Hudis Gewirtzman 1876 - 1941 b: Kobrin d: Kobrin Ephrayim Stawski 1869 - 1928 b: Antopol Bashkeh Pappe 1866 - 1942 b: Antopol d: Antopol Gershon Zvi Stawski 1872 - 1943 d: Auschwitz Sheindel Rudkin 1874 - b: Kowal Tsivya Cyla Stawski 1878 - 1941 b: Antopol d: Antopol Yosef David Feldsztejn - 1914 d: Antopol 8 |                    
  | 9 1.1. Rachel Stawski Levin (1888-1941) was married to Mordechai Levin (d.1941). They lived in Kobrin and had three children. Rachel, her husband and children were all murdered in the Holocaust. 1.2. Sheine Sadie Stofsky (Stawski) Lobe (1892-1961) moved to the USA at the age of sixteen or seventeen. She married Harry Lobe (1881-1971) who was a plumber. In the 1940 US Population Census it is noted that he had a plumbing supply store. They lived in Cleveland, Ohio and had three children. 1.2.1. Mathilda Elaine Lobe Klein (1913-unk.) married Irvin Warren Klein (1908-ca.1940). Prior to Irvin’s death while serving in the US Navy during World War II, they had one daughter, Gwelyn (b.1939). The only other information we have about Mathilda’s life appears in the 1940 US Population Census referenced above, where she is listed as a widow with a 9-month-old baby, living with her parents. 1.2.2. Lillian Lobe Leimsieder (1917-1987) was living at home and worked as a secretary in a general store, according to the 1940 US Population Census cited above. She married Joseph Leimsieder (1913-1993) and they had one son. 1.2.2.1. Mark Edwin Leimsieder (1952-2011) was a beloved high school teacher and football coach who died of cancer. He was married to Carrie Baskin and they had three daughters: Leesa Marie Leimsieder, Marcie Ellen Leimsieder Kelly who is married to Tyler Kelly and Saree Mikkel Leimsieder Doyle, who is married to John Doyle, and they have a daughter Charlotte (b.2018). 1.2.3. Myron Saul Lobe (1923- 1997) was in the plumbing business, like his father. He served in the US Armed Forces during World War II. Myron was married and later divorced. 1.3. Miriam Mirel Stawski Messer (1900-1941) may have had a twin brother who died as an infant. She married Josef Messer (1900-1941), who was a carpenter. They had two children, both born in Kobrin. They all perished in the Holocaust. 1.4. Chana Stawski Markuze Epstein (1906-2002) was born in Kobrin and married Avraham Markuze (d.1958) of Kobrin. They moved to Paris and had one daughter. Later, they made Aliyah. Chana’s second husband was Avraham Epstein. 1.4.1. Rivka Markuze (Popowsky) Dromi (b.1927) married Yitschak Popowsky (1921-2004) in 1947 and made Aliyah. A year later, they changed their name to Dromi (which means “from the south” in Hebrew). They have two children. 1.4.1.1. Eytan Dromi (b.1950) is married and has four children. The family lives in Israel. 1.4.1.2. Noga Dromi Ben Sasson (b.1954) is married to Yom Tov Ben Sasson. They live in Israel and have four children. The Jews of Kobrin were forced at gunpoint to dig a huge pit in the ground and then they were shot and hastily buried by the Nazis. Chana Markuze memorialized them with Pages of Testimony2 in Yad VaShem, Jerusalem. An example of these Pages can be found in the appendix. 2 Pages of Testimony (Dapai Ed) are special forms created by Yad Vashem to restore the personal identities and record the brief life stories of the six million Jews murdered by the Nazis and their accomplices. Submitted by survivors, remaining family members or friends, in commemoration of Jews murdered in the Holocaust,          













DESCENDANTS OF MICHAEL STAWSKI Michael Stawski - 1915 b: Antopol Not Known Rachel Stawski 1888 - 1941 b: Kobrin d: Kobrin Mordechai Levin 1885 - 1941 b: Kellem, Poland d: Kobrin Rivka Levin 1911 - 1941 b: Kobrin d: Kobrin Hersh Ber Levin 1915 - 1941 b: Kobrin d: Kobrin Yosef Yosaleh Levin 1918 - 1941 b: Kobrin d: Kobrin Sheine Sadie Stofsky 1892 - 1961 b: Russia d: Cleveland, Ohio Harry Lobe 1881 - 1971 b: Russia d: Cleveland, Ohio Mathilda Elaine Lobe 1913 - b: Cleveland, Ohio Irwin Warren Klein - 1944 d: World War II Lilian Lobe 1917 - 1987 b: Cleveland, Ohio d: Chesterland, Ohio Joseph Leimsieder 1913 - 1993 b: Chesterland, Ohio d: Chesterland, Ohio Myron Saul Lobe 1923 - 1997 b: Cleveland, Ohio d: Chesterland, Ohio Esther Hudis Gewirtzman 1876 - 1941 b: Kobrin d: Kobrin Miriam Mirel Stawski 1900 - 1941 b: Kobrin d: Kobrin Josef Messer 1900 - 1941 Leah Messer 1927 - 1941 b: Kobrin Michael Messer 1931 - 1941 b: Kobrin Chana Stawski 1906 - 2002 b: Kobrin d: Tel Aviv Avraham Markuze - 1958 b: Kobrin d: Tel Aviv Rivka Markuze 1927 - b: Paris Yitschak Dromi 1921 - 2004 b: Kobrin d: Tel Aviv Avraham Epstein 1888 - 1968 b: Chomsk d: Tel Aviv 10 |                    
  | 11 L to R: Genia (Golda) Stawski, Riva Stawski, Moshe (Stawski) Stavi, Yaakov Shmuel Stawski and Moshe’s wife Rosa Stawski. THE CHILDREN OF YAAKOV SHMUEL AND RIVA STAWSKI The couple had seven children, but we are not certain of the exact order of their birth. The following is based on our educated guess. This formal family photo shows the couple with two of their adult children. •2. EPHRAYIM (FRUIM) STAWSKI (CA.1869-PRIOR TO 1930) Ephrayim was probably the oldest of Yaakov Shmuel and Riva’s children, although we do not have concrete proof of his birth year. Ephrayim worked with his father in the flour mill in Antopol. Later, he worked as a grain merchant in Kremenchug and Yekatinoslav [also known as Ekatrinoslav and in modern Ukraine, as Dnipro]. He would send the grain to his brother Michael in Kobrin, which Michael would then sell in the surrounding area. Ephrayim married Bashkeh Pappe (ca.1866–1942), the daughter of Rav Netanel Chaim Pappe and they were among the first Zionists in Antopol. As recounted in the PAPPE chapter, Bashkeh’s parents, her sister Chaya Esther, her youngest brother, Yisrael Yitschak, and a younger sister immigrated to the Holy Land in 1890. Another sister, Henya Fraydel, immigrated to the USA. Bashkeh’s parents and their youngest children settled in Jerusalem. Chaya Esther immigrated to the USA from Palestine. Read more about their lives in the PAPPE chapter. A letter written in Yiddish by Ephrayim’s brother, Gershon Zvi, in either 1919 or 1920 to their brother Moshe Stavi, who was living in the Holy Land, describes how Bashkeh, Ephrayim and their extended families were suffering terribly during World War I and in fact, were starving. He continues with the news that Ephrayim moved to Kremenchug in 1919, which we surmise was to help his father with his new business. The following winter was again extremely difficult. In addition to the harsh physical elements, Bashkeh was emotionally distressed, as she was unaware of what was happening in Kremenchug with Ephrayim. Gershon Zvi added that he heard that last Passover, Bashkeh had received about 1,000 Marks from her sister (probably Chaya Esther (Ida) Pappe Felder) and from Pinchas (another Stawski brother), both living in New York, which kept her and the children from starving. In 1939, Bashkeh’s brother, Rav Yisrael Yitschak Pappe, wrote a letter from Jerusalem to his daughter Ethel Schwartz in New York. His letter implores her to contact his sister Chaya Ida and her sons, the Felder brothers, to ask them to send money to help support his brother Yankel and his sister Bashkeh in Antopol. They were suffering greatly from lack of food and supplies during the pre-World War II period and were near starvation. This letter is reproduced in the PAPPE chapter. Ephrayim died sometime after World War I and prior to 1930. We know this because his grandson, Alfred Ephraim, was born in 1930 and named for him. Yankel and Bashkeh were killed by the Nazis during the Holocaust. On August 14, 1942, the Jewish ghetto residents of Antopol were forced at gunpoint to march into the woods where they were shot and killed. Ephrayim (Fruim) Stawski Left to right: Ephrayim, Gershon (Harry), Bashkeh and Fradle (seated in front). 12 |                    
  | 13 THE CHILDREN OF EPHRAYIM AND BASHKEH STAWSKI Our research has confirmed the names and birthdates of two of Ephrayim and Bashkeh Stawski’s children, Fradle and Gershon, whose lives are described on the next few pages. Their birthdates of 1890 and 1902 respectively, are 12 years apart so it is possible that other children were born either between them or after them. A clue to answering the question about whether Ephrayim and Bashkeh Stawski had additional children was found in the pages of a letter (shown in the appendix) from Ephrayim’s brother Moshe Stavi, written on September 21, 1962, to a relative, Akiva Ben Ezra, about the Stawski family. In a translation of one section of the letter, Moshe Stavi wrote that “The children who stayed with the mother [Bashkeh] were annihilated in Antopol.” Since we know that both Fradle and Gershon left Antopol in their teens, this leads us to believe that Ephrayim and Bashkeh did have additional children who remained in Antopol and were murdered by the Nazis along with their mother and all the town residents. Right above this passage in the same letter, Moshe Stavi mentions Bashkeh and Ephrayim’s daughter Yehudit as “the one who had been exiled to Siberia.” This specific reference caused quite a bit of confusion because while we know that Ephrayim and Bashkeh’s daughter Fradle had been sentenced to hard labor in Siberia, Fradle’s cousin, Yehudit Feldsztein, had also been sent to Siberia. Did Moshe Stavi confuse his two nieces and was referring to his sister Tzivya Feldsztein’s daughter or is it possible that Fradle’s middle name was Yehudit and her uncle referred her by that name? Since our search for specific information about a daughter of Ephrayim and Bashkeh named Yehudit was futile, we conclude that since Moshe Stavi referred to the daughter of Ephrayim and Bashkeh as Yehudit, it was probably Fradle’s middle name. Both of these young women were likely named Yehudit in memory of common relative. It is interesting to note that other family members, such as our grandmother Ethel Leah Yehudit Pappe Schwartz, were also given the name Yehudit. 2.1. Fradle (Yehudit?) Stawski Barachenko (1890-1937) was named for her maternal grandmother Fraydel, Rav Moshe Nachman Pappe’s wife. We know about Fradle’s early activities from a story entitled “Fraydle the Revolutionary” which is included in the Antopol Yizkor Book,3 as part of her Uncle Moshe Stavi’s memoirs. The photo on the facing page is included in the Hebrew version of the Antopol Yizkor Book. Below is an excerpt from the story. In the years 1908-1910 when he lived in Warsaw, in order to participate in the Hebrew literature movement, the author Moshe Stavi used to visit his hometown of Antopol and also his relatives, especially, his sister Tsivia Feldstein. He came in 1908 at the end of the summer to spend the holidays and remained there until after Sukkot. The youth used to gather around him, as it longed for Zion. At 3 Antopol Yizkor Book, p. 172 in the Hebrew Version, p. 248 in the English translation. that time, Fradle appeared, a teenage girl, the daughter of his brother Ephrayim and Bashke, the daughter of Rabbi Netanel Hayyim Pape. She was inclined to socialism and freeing the Russian homeland from the Czarist yoke. At that time, it was a custom that at the end of the Sabbath and holidays, the youth of Antopol would go to stroll in the garden of the landowner Goren. Then, the group would split into leftist and rightist factions. The rightists would sing Zionist songs and long for the Land of Israel. The leftists would sing songs of liberation and the rise of a Russian homeland influenced by socialism. When revolutionary activity expanded, Fradle was among its leaders. We got news that the district police in Kobrin were about to arrest her. Moshe Stavi was the only grown-up man in the family then in Antopol. Her father Ephrayim was in Kremantsiuk [Kremenchug] in the south. Moshe took upon himself the task of smuggling Fradle out of town. They put her in a wagon and covered her up with different things. Thus, they brought her to Drohitsin. From there, they took her by various ways to Kremantsiuk. The young Social Democrat was then about 17. She remained some time with her grandfather Yaakov Shmuel Stavski, who lived in Kremantsiuk. Afterwards, she went to Yekaterinoslav together with her father, a grain merchant. In Yekaterinoslav, Fradle joined a local revolutionary group. In 1910, she participated in an assassination attempt on the governor of Yekaterinoslav. Fradle was arrested and jailed. She was sentenced to hard labor in Siberia. Her Social Democratic friends in the United States collected money with the purpose of freeing her or helping her in Siberia. In 1917, when the revolution broke out in Russia, Fradle left Siberia and came to Moscow. There has been no trace of her since 1919. This was the fate of a revolutionary in Russia. The story of how Fradle escaped arrest in Antopol is confirmed in a letter dated July 24, 1961 from her uncle Moshe Stavi in Israel to his (and our) relative Akiva Ben Ezra: I do not have any material on Fradle’s trial. I only remember that in America there was a lot of publicity about it and they also integrated my name into it. I remember that when they were about to arrest her in Antipolye, I was there and I smuggled her from there, and from a close-by station I sent her to Kremenchug to my parents, and from there she moved on to Yekatrinoslav, where her father, my brother Ephrayim lived, and there happened what happened. Left to right: Fradle Stawski and her cousin Yehudit Feldsztejn. (Photo from the Antopol Yizkor Book.) 14 |                    
  | 15 Letter from the Government Prosecutor dated July 2, 2008 and signed by V.E. Baranchik. e t r y d He adds that he has no photograph of her, but is sure that her brother, Gershon Harry Stawsky in New York, has photos. This letter reveals to us that Ephrayim had moved to Yekatrinoslav for work. This is the only document we have found which supplies this piece of information. On the jewishgen.org website listing of Victims of Stalin, Fradle’s name appears on the list of people executed, as: Stavsky, Faina Efremovna, 1890, Antopol (year and place of birth). In 2009, with the help of a family member born in Russia (on Dvorah Netzer’s paternal Medved side), Dvorah wrote to the Russian authorities asking for the records of Fradle’s death. She received the following four documents, none of which clearly state that Fradle was executed during the Stalin regime, although we know from the above listing, that she was indeed killed. They seem to avoid the subject of execution, speaking mostly about rehabilitation and clearing her name posthumously. The letters are shown here with brief translations. Letters from the Russian Government regarding Fradle Stawski Barachenko’s Rehabilitation Letter from the Government Prosecutor dated July 2, 2008 and signed by V.E. Baranchik: With regard to the rehabilitation of Stawski, F.E., she was given repressions [probably jail time] in 1921, 1922. Her request was discussed, and there are declarations about it. In regard to 1937, we sent the request to the Supreme Court. In regard to the fate of Stawski’s husband, Victor Barachenko Yermiyowich (son of Jeremia) and their son Vladimir, we have no information as to their fate. Certificate of Rehabilitation: 31 years old. Born in Grodno Gubernya. Residence before her arrest: Moscow, Pietrovsky Blvd. 19/1. Place of work and role before arrest: Courses in vocational school [student]. She was arrested 22.12.1921 as a suspect of belonging to the extreme right-wing party SR. On 21.2.1922 she was released from prison by trial of the Communist Party. According to law 2006 about rehabilitation of the victims of political persecution, Mrs. Stawski was rehabilitated. Declaration about Rehabilitation, dated August 22, 1922: Mrs. Stawski Faina, 31 years old, lived in Moscow before the curfew. Before her imprisonment she worked as a professional. She was arrested on 7.8.1922 by the Supreme Court according to clauses…She was sentenced to two years of imprisonment in a prison with total isolation [solitary confinement] and forced labor. She is taken under surveillance from the court hall [to prison]. Left: Certificate of Rehabilitation Declaration about Rehabilitation, dated August 22, 1922. 16 |                    
  | 17 Certificate: Affidavit from the High Court of the Russian Federation, Military Department: The file of the guilt of Stawski Faina daughter of Efrem, born 1890, who was arrested on 3.4.1937 unjustifiably, was sentenced to be executed with confiscation of all her possessions. On 23.4.1957 the Supreme Court of Russia which judged Stawski on 13.7.1937, is declared as illegal. The verdict from the 13.7.1937, with respect to Stawski Faina, was nullified, and the file was closed. Stawski Faina, daughter of Efrem, was a victim of the political repression, and she is rehabilitated posthumously. Dvorah Netzer searched Israeli and American archives and websites for further information about Fradle’s life after leaving Antopol, without success. Then, Yuly Korobov, a grandson of Dov Ber Stawski, sent her the Russian version of Fradle’s Wikipedia entry, which contained previously undocumented details about her life. Luba Bar Menachem, Fradle’s second cousin once removed on the Stawski side, provided us with a translation of this Russian Wikipedia page about Fradle, who was also known as Faina Efremovna Stavskaj. We learned that one deed, for which she was arrested, occurred in 1907 when she planted a bomb in the Hotel France targeting the governor of Yekatrinoslav. She was imprisoned and then sentenced in 1911 to 20 years of hard labor in Siberia for this crime against the state. In 1917, after the Czarist government fell, she and many other prisoners were freed from Siberia. She met her future husband, Victor Moshe Barachenko (1892-1980), in Crimea during an organized vacation for newly released prisoners to recuperate. She later moved to Moscow where she married Victor, who was from Bessarabia (present day Moldova). Around 1920, they had a son named Vladimir Alexander. During her years in Moscow, Fradle worked as the Director of the State Historical Museum and Library, a position reserved for those highly trusted by the Communist Party. In 1937, when colleagues at the library denounced her on false suspicions of subversive activity, she was arrested. After her arrest, Fradle’s husband and son had no idea what happened to her. It was not until 1956 that Victor received official confirmation that she had been executed by the Stalin regime in 1937. He petitioned to have her record revised and finally succeeded in 1957 when the previous court decision was reversed, and she was “rehabilitated” (her name was cleared) posthumously. A full translation of the Russian Wikipedia page can be found in the appendix. Luba Bar Menachem told Dvorah that she visited Moscow with her parents when she was about five years old (around 1955). They visited Victor Barachenko, who played with her and made small animals of plasticine for her. Yuly Korobov also visited Victor in Moscow around 1964, when the latter was already 72 years old. Moshe had devoted his life to the memory of his wife and wrote a book about her and their life together called The Life and Death of Faina Stavski. The book was never published but is preserved in the Moscow Archives. 2.1.1. Vladimir Alexander Barachenko (ca.1920-ca.1943) served in the Red Army during World War II. After the war ended, he was killed in West Ukraine by Ukrainians who were anti-Soviet and anti-Semitic. 2.2. Harry (Gershon) Stawsky (Stawski) (1902-1962) was born in Antopol. According to his son Alfred (Al) Stawsky, Gershon escaped conscription in a labor force at the end of World War I, when he was about 16 years old, by finding work on a tramp steamer bound for Italy. From there, he found his way to Argentina where he lived in Buenos Aires with Stawski relatives for a while. Gershon immigrated to the USA at the age of 21. According to the ship manifest (see appendix), he arrived from Buenos Aires on the S.S. Vauban on August 27, 1923. He went directly to live with his uncle Pinchas (Philip) Stawski, who was already living in New York City on East 119th Street. The only evidence we have found that Harry kept in touch with his family back in Antopol, is a letter which he wrote to his uncle, Moshe Stavi, sometime after 1939. Harry confirmed that he had been in contact with his sister Fradle until 1939, after which he’d had no news. According to our research, Fradle was probably executed in 1937, so Harry’s memory of dates was most likely inaccurate. Harry’s Petition for Naturalization dated April 1, 1924, shown in the appendix, provides the basis for the information we know about his early life in the USA. After immigrating, he changed his first name to Harry, altered the spelling of his last name to Stawsky, and was already married to a woman named Rose from Romania. His cousin, Morris Reich, signed the petition as one of Harry’s witnesses. Another document, Samuel Felder’s Petition for Naturalization, which Harry signed as a witness, revealed that Harry worked in leather goods. Our knowledge of Harry and Rose’s life was, until recently, limited to vague recollections of extended family members, who believed that they had two children, named David and Genia. After searching for their children for fifteen years, we finally made a connection with a descendent of Rose’s family named Karen Albert, who was able to put us in contact with Harry and Rose’s son, Alfred (Al) Stawsky, a few years prior to the completion of this book. We now know that the original information about children was incorrect because Al is the only child of Harry and Rose Stawsky. We are excited to be able to include his memories of his parents and details about his own life. Harry and Rose We learned that one deed for hich she as arrested occ Stawsky in 1952 Certificate declaring that Faina Stawski was a victim of the political repression. 18 |                    
  | 19 Harry married Ruchel Rose Malamed (1900-2001) who was born in the town of Unghen, Bessarabia, Romania (present-day Moldavia). They met sometime after she immigrated with her mother and brother around 1920. According to Harry’s Petition for Naturalization, they were married by April 1924, less than a year after Harry arrived in New York. The couple resided in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn and their son Alfred Ephraim Stawsky was born in 1930. Harry was employed at his cousins’ business, the Felder Brothers Leather Company, and worked his way up to the position of foreman. Rose worked as a sewing machine operator and was active in the Garment Workers Union. Harry eventually opened his own business, the Star Leathercraft Co., a novelty manufacturing business, in partnership with a friend. It operated out of a single-room loft on West 20th street in Manhattan. Business was difficult, especially after his partner pulled out of their agreement. During World War II, when there was a shortage of metal, Harry designed a key case with no metallic parts. This design was patented in 1951. Rose helped Harry in the shop part-time as a sewing machine operator. Al Stawsky describes his father Harry as an avid reader, with a penchant for world affairs and history. He read newspapers cover to cover, especially the Freiheit, a Yiddish Communist Paper. Harry and Rose spoke Yiddish to each other. According to Al, his parents had communist/socialist leanings and supported local Communist Party candidates and the progressive New York State American Labor Party, at a time when communists had a significant following in New York City. Rose was active in Jewish women’s groups. She served as secretary for the Emma Lazarus Jewish Women’s Club’s local chapter. Harry was a pensive and serious man who had no patience for people who were pompous or phony. He was a chess aficionado who studied the chess feature in the newspapers and sometimes engaged in chess games by mail. On the weekends, Harry would carry his worn wooden chess set to Sea Breeze Park across from their apartment building to find a “pick-up” player in the crowd. Harry died suddenly of a heart attack at age 60 while working at his shop. After his death, Rose supported herself as a seamstress (her skills were in high demand). Rose lived until she was 101 years old. 2.2.1. Alfred (Al) Ephraim Stawsky (b.1930) attended public school as well as an after-school program at a local Jewish community center to study Yiddish, Jewish culture and history. He was politically active during high school and at Brooklyn College, where he became Chair of the NYC Student Division of the Labor Youth League, a Marxist organization. After graduating with a bachelor’s degree in liberal arts, Al pursued graduate studies in psychology. In 1953, he was drafted into the US Army to serve in the Korean War, during the period of McCarthyism and the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) witch-hunt. Al refused to sign the required “loyalty oath” disavowing any involvement in the Attorney General’s List of Subversive Organizations. After a year of military training and service while under investigation, Al was expelled from the Army in 1954 with an undesirable discharge. When McCarthyism was later discredited, he was issued an honorable discharge for his service. Prior to being drafted, Al met May Williams Boyd (1931-2011), an African American student activist and leader. Her great-great-grandfather, Davie Arthur, was the oldest of four siblings who escaped enslavement in Maryland via the Underground Railroad around 1840. In 1956, Al and May were married and settled into an apartment in Brooklyn. As an interracial couple, they encountered discrimination and racism, especially in the early years. May’s parents accepted Al right away. After a short while, Al’s parents Harry and Rose welcomed May to the family. May began what would become a long career as an elementary school teacher in East Harlem, NYC. Their daughter, Alina, was born in 1970. After Harry’s death in 1962, Al ran his father’s business for several months to complete existing orders and close outstanding accounts. It was then sold, which offered Rose some financial security as a widow. Having finalized his father’s business commitments, Al enrolled in night school at the City College School of Engineering and earned a degree as a mechanical engineer in 1970. After meeting necessary qualifications and passing the exams, he was certified as a Professional Engineer. Al pursued a career at the Engelhard Corporation in the Research and Development department. He was quickly promoted to a series of engineering management positions. His most interesting work was in the design and development of catalytic converter devices for pollution control from gasoline and diesel-powered vehicles. He is named in several patents and contributed research papers to various technical societies. Al and May moved to Teaneck, New Jersey in 1977, where they eventually joined the Unitarian Universalistic Congregation of the Palisades, an “intentionally diverse” congregation, which gave them both a comfortable place to worship. In 2002, May received the Lee Reid Award for outstanding service in bringing people of diverse cultures together, from the Martin Luther King Committee of Bergen County. After her death in 2011, May was posthumously awarded the Winifred Norman Latimer Award for outstanding work in racial justice from the Unitarian Universalist Metro District. After May’s death, Al took over her position as chairman of the congregation’s Racial and Justice Team. He was honored for his work in 2018 with the Theodora Lacey Racial Justice Award from the Northern NJ Eliminate Racism Task Force sponsored by the NNJ-YWCA. Al published a posthumous collection of May’s poems and prose.4 2.2.1.1. Alina May Stawsky (b.1970) has a bachelor’s in chemistry and a master’s in education. She was a physics and chemistry teacher in a New Jersey high school. Alina is a single mother and has a daughter Amethyst Rai Stawsky-Tucker (b.2006). She interrupted her teaching career so that she and her daughter could live with Al to help take care of him after he suffered a stroke. 4 Stawsky, Alfred, editor. Come In Out of the Rain, Poetry and Prose of May Boyd Stawsky (New York, Hudson House, 2015). Left: May and Al Stawsky L to R: May, Alina and Al Stawsky 1987 Alina and Amethyst Stawsky – 2019 20 |                    
  | 21 •3. GERSHON ZVI STAWSKI (CA.1872-1943) Gershon Zvi was probably the second child of Yaakov Shmuel and Riva Stawski. He was a Zionist activist who worked for the Jewish National Fund for a while but was not happy with the atmosphere, so he resigned. Gershon Zvi married Sheindel Rudkin in 1898. We know the approximate date of his wedding from a newspaper ad, congratulating them, as well as the groom’s father, Yaacov Shmuel, on their marriage. The ad was placed by Rav Yisrael Yitschak Pappe, Bashkeh’s brother. A translation follows: Mazal Tov to my friend Gershon Zvi Stawski of Sosnowiec on his marriage to his beloved Sheindel Rudkin of Koval on the eve of the first of the month of last Iyar, and with congratulations to his father Yaakov Shmuel, I donated one franc to the Misgav LaDach Hospital in Jerusalem may it be built. Rav Yisrael Yitschak Pappe in Jerusalem. From a newspaper announcement in HaMelitz on April 8, 1902, we learned that Gershon Zvi collected donations for the Zionist Shekel5 from the Jews of Sosnowiec just as his brother Ephrayim’s brother-in-law Rav Yisrael Yitschak Pappe did in Jerusalem. Gershon Zvi and Sheindel had three children, Ze’ev, Shlomo and Golda. From their clothing and the props, we can assume that the family was prosperous enough to afford such a lovely professional photo. Gershon Zvi wrote several letters to his brother Moshe in Palestine from the Lodz Hotel Rosenblum in 1935 about his work for the Jewish National Fund (JNF) and the fact that he was not happy. He wrote that there is intense competition between the JNF and Keren Hayesod,6 but that he managed to raise a lot of money for the JNF. He wants 5 Zionist Shekel 

!
"

#$%

& 



'*+-

/ 6 Keren Hayesod*;<
= 
/


"
<

> to meet Ussishkin7 and work with him and other Zionists. He writes that he was at the Zionist Congress in Basel and that he is the most active member in Poland of the Hovevei Zion8 movement. However, he feels that many people in the organization dislike him. Gershon Zvi was one of the leaders of the Jewish community in Sosnowiec where he resided. In a letter dated February 2, 1939, the last we have between the brothers, Gershon Zvi writes that his son almost went to Eretz Yisrael with his HaShomer movement youth group in Warsaw. But the purpose of the letter was to admonish Moshe for not helping to put up a memorial gravestone for their father, who had died sometime in 1937. Gershon Zvi added that Moshe should write to Antopol about the tombstone. He himself had traveled there to take care of their mother’s tombstone, which caused him considerable emotional distress. The letter, written in a combination of Hebrew and Yiddish, is reproduced in the appendix. Below is a brief translation. …The tombstone on our father’s z”l grave has not yet been erected. It is a shame that you didn’t complete this, as I told you to do when you visited Antopol, to stay there two more days and to fix in person all that is needed for the tombstone and the tent [memorial] around it like on our mother’s z”l grave, as our father z”l commanded us several times to erect around his grave a tent [memorial] like on our mother’s z”l grave/ But I should not be angry on what has already passed… During the Holocaust, all the Jews of Sosnowiec, including Gershon Zvi and his family, were crowded into a ghetto. When the ghetto was liquidated, the family was transported to Auschwitz. An archival record confirms that Gershon Zvi was murdered there in 1943. We do not have definitive proof of the fate of his family members, but we can assume with confidence that they were all murdered during the Holocaust. Their three children were all married, probably with families, at the time of deportation. See the appendix for the Page of Testimony submitted to Yad VaShem in honor of Gershon Zvi Stawski. 3.1. Ze’ev Stawski (unk.-1943). 3.2. Shlomo Stawski (1901-1943). 3.3. Golda Stawski Goldenberg (1903-1943) was married to Moshe Goldenberg in Warsaw. Her family traveled from Sosnowiec to attend her wedding. 7 Menachem Ussishkin *#?@D        #$F#/ 

   '  %
 
   
 

 




<#$KD
%LM

O 8 Hovevei Zion, also known as Hibbat Zion

LP
Q%
P


"

#??#<

movement and for the waves of Aliyah to the Holy Land. Gershon Zvi Stawski Ad published in the HaMelitz newspaper in Russia on June 20, 1898 congratulating Gershon Zvi and his bride Sheindel Rudkin on their marriage. Shlomo, Golda and Ze’ev Stawski shkeh s brother. A translation follows: 22 |                    
  | 23 •4. TSIVYA CYLA STAWSKI FELDSZTEJN (1878-1942) Tsivya Cyla was the third child of Yaakov Shmuel and Riva Stawski. She married Yosef David Feldsztejn (unk.- 1916) who had a printing house in Antopol. In a letter from her husband Yosef to her brother Moshe Stavi dated 1914, we learned that Yosef wanted to buy land in Tel Aviv and had 6,000 of some unidentified monetary unit to pay for it. It seems that he wanted to make Aliyah with his family, but the plan never came to fruition. An undated letter from Gershon Zvi to Moshe recounts that Tsivya and the family suffered from the terrible living conditions during World War I in Antopol. In addition to scarcity of food and other necessities, the Russians set fire to the town in the summer of 1915 when they lost it to the Poles. Tsivya’s house was one of the homes burned to the ground. Soon afterward, her husband became ill and died in 1916. Somehow, Tsivya survived through World War I but was killed in the Holocaust in 1942 along with three of her children. A plaque in memory of the family is displayed on the Memorial Wall in the Antopol Synagogue in Tel Aviv with the following inscription (translated here): “R. Yosef David Feldstein, died 21 Iyar 5674. And his wife Tsivya of blessed memory and their children Avraham, Ben Zion and Rayzl (Paytze)”. THE CHILDREN OF TSIVYA CYLA STAWSKI AND YOSEF DAVID FELDSZTEJN 4.1. Yehudit Feldsztejn (1895-unk.) was active in the socialist movement, like her cousin Fradle. She was arrested and sent to Siberia in 1895, arriving before Fradle, but they served part of their sentences there together. While imprisoned, Yehudit contracted tuberculosis and was released. The date and place of her death are unknown. 4.2. Avraham (Avramchik) Feldsztejn (1898-1942) was a highly intelligent man who worked as an accountant in Antopol. According to family stories, he was also known as the most attractive bachelor in Antopol. From family letters, we know that at one point he wished to get married, but his parents disapproved of his choice. Avraham obeyed their wishes and never married. Avraham served on the Board of Directors of the Antopol Orphans Home which was founded in 1921. He was murdered in Antopol during the Holocaust. 4.3. Frumtche (Frances) Feldsztejn Troyky Cohen (1902-unk.) married her first husband, Meyer Yosef Troyky (ca. 1885-unk.), in 1923. Meyer had prospered living in the USA and returned to Antopol when he was almost 40 years old. After their son David was born in 1924, the family immigrated together to the United States. In the 1930 US Population Census for New York (see appendix) Meyer is listed as 45 years old and a grocer. Frumtche is listed as 29 years old and David as 5 years old. After divorcing Meyer in 1946, Frumtche married Ben Cohen in 1955. Avraham (Avramchik) Feldsztejn Tsivya Cyla Stawski Feldsztejn Yehudit Feldsztejn 1895 - Avraham Feldsztejn 1898 - 1942 b: Antopol d: Antopol Frumt France Feldsz 1902 - b: Anto Tsivya Cyla Stawski 1878 - 1941 b: Antopol d: Antopol Yosef Feldsz - 1914 d: Anto Frumtche Frances Feldsztejn 1902 - b: Antopol Meyer Yosef Troyky 1885 - 1964 b: Antopol d: New York Ben Cohen Ben Zion Feldsztejn 1903 - 1942 b: Antopol d: Pruzhana David ztejn pol Sarah - 1942 d: Pruzhana Raizel Rosa Feldsztejn 1907 - 1942 b: Antopol d: Pinsk Shlomo 1906 - 1942 d: Pinsk Genia Gittel Feldsztejn 1911 - 1972 b: Antopol d: Tel Aviv Pinchas Czerniak 1909 - 1993 b: Horodetz d: Israel 24 |                    
  | 25 4.3.1. David (Troyky) Troyka (1924-2011) changed his last name at some point to Troyka instead of Troyky. He served in the US Army from 1943 to 1946. After his discharge, David went to Montana State University to pursue an undergraduate degree in accounting under the GI Bill. He then worked as the Chief Financial Officer of Botany Industries. After Botany Industries closed, David bought, renovated and resold large apartment buildings. He was married to and later divorced from a woman named Helene. In 1964, he married Lynn Quitman, a Professor Emerita of Writing at City University of New York and the author of thirteen college English textbooks. The couple adopted an 11-year-old Catholic girl named Kirsten. While researching the Stawski family, Dvorah Netzer recognized Lynn’s name because they had both attended the Akiba Hebrew Academy in Philadelphia, although Lynn is a few years older than Dvorah. 4.3.1.1. Kirsten Joy Olivero Black married David Black, a former US Air Force pilot who is a pilot for American Airlines. They have two children: Lindsey (b.1988) and Ryan (b.1991). 4.4. Ben Zion Feldsztejn (1903-1942) was the fourth child of Tsivya and Yosef David Feldsztejn. He hoped to make Aliyah from Antopol to find employment in Eretz Yisrael. Through letters written by his grandfather Yaakov Shmuel and his mother Tsivya, we know that Tsivya requested that her brother Moshe send a certificate to enable Ben Zion to immigrate. The certificate consisted of an affidavit from the family and permission from the British Mandate. Family members in Palestine had to be persistent in their requests to the government, which was reluctant to issue these certificates. According to a letter from Tsivya written in 1926, the certificate never arrived. In her letter, she admonishes Moshe for not having taken care of it because her son, Ben Zion, could otherwise have already been in Eretz Yisrael. Later, at an unknown date, Tsivya writes that Ben Zion received a certificate through other means, not through Moshe, which infuriated her. Ben Zion had already left Antopol and should reach Paris in about 4 weeks. He probably had received permission to leave Antopol, but not to immigrate to Palestine. On December 3, 1935, Ben Zion wrote to Moshe asking when his papers would arrive. Since he never received the proper documentation, Ben Zion returned to Antopol and married a woman named Sara. They had a daughter named Rivka (1936-1942). The entire family was murdered in the Holocaust in Pruzhana (Pruzhany in modern Belarus). Pages of Testimony have been submitted for them at Yad VaShem by Gittel Czerniak. 4.5. Genia Gittel Feldsztejn Czerniak (1911-1972) was the fifth child of Tsivya and Yosef David Feldsztejn. She was a highly intelligent woman who received her pharmacist degree in Warsaw. Gittel married Dr. Pinchas Czerniak (1909-1993) who was born in Horodetz, one of seven children of Aryeh and Shifra Czerniak. After his family had moved to Antopol, two of his brothers immigrated to Argentina. His mother was murdered during the Holocaust. Professor Czerniak served as the doctor for Antopol and the surrounding area. He was well respected not only for his medical abilities, but for the professionalism, devotion and compassion he showed his patients. When the Germans invaded Antopol in mid-1941, Pinchas was stripped of his ability to care for patients when he, his wife Gittel and the rest of the Jews in the town were imprisoned in a ghetto. Their first daughter, Iruni, was born in 1941. Realizing the imminent and mortal danger they faced from the murderous Nazis, Gittel and Pinchas entrusted the care of their three-month-old baby to one of Pinchas’ unmarried Christian patients named Vera Okhritz. At Professor Czerniak’s request, the steward of his hospital agreed to help Vera with chores, transportation and other needs during their absence. The Czerniak family of three were among only seven or eight survivors (the number varies according to historical sources) from the massacre of Antopol’s over 3000 Antopol Jews, on or before October 15, 1942. The story of their survival is a miraculous one, demonstrating their inner strength, bravery, wisdom, ingenuity and a glimmer of hope. After escaping the confines of the ghetto, Gittel and Pinchas were hidden by various neighbors for several months, in barn storage areas and for six months, in a hole in the ground. As Nazi suspicions arose, it became too dangerous for their friends to hide them any longer. One friend told them about an underground group of partisans near Antopol, who were fighting the Nazis. Gittel and Pinchas somehow escaped into the nearby woods in April 1943, found the partisans and became freedom fighters. After joining the partisans, Pinchas and Gittel were able to sneak into town at intervals to leave food for Vera and Iruni, and to catch a glimpse of their daughter from afar. After liberation in July, 1944, Gittel and Pinchas returned to Antopol to reclaim their two-year-old daughter. They encountered strong resistance from Vera, who could not imagine giving up the baby that she had grown to love. Gittel and Pinchas understood Vera’s reaction and appreciated everything she had done to protect their child but eventually, a court ordered Vera to return the child to her parents. After regaining custody of their daughter, Pinchas and Gittel registered as returning Polish residents. They first moved to Lodz and soon afterwards to Lansberg where Pinchas managed a hospital for six months. While awaiting approval of their permits to make Aliyah to Palestine, Genia Gittel Feldsztejn Czerniak Freedom Fighters/ Partisans ca. 1943- 44. Pinchas Czerniak seated, with Gittel at his left. David (Troyky) Troyka 26 |                    
  | 27 they lived in Breslau where Pinchas worked in the municipal hospital and in a university clinic for dermato-neurological diseases. There, he developed a treatment for syphilis and gonorrhea. The Warsaw Ministry of Health, which approved Professor Czerniak’s treatment, sent his research article to the USA where it was enthusiastically accepted by colleagues in New York Hospital. In Breslau, Pinchas founded and managed a project for preventing and eradicating syphilis, which awarded him wide recognition. After two years in Poland, the family moved to Paris for six months, where Pinchas studied at the Pasteur Institute and worked in a university clinic. In preparation for his work while living in Israel, Pinchas sent research and medical equipment ahead to their new home. The family sailed from Marseilles, and arrived in the Holy Land on April 4, 1950, finally attaining their goal. In Israel, Pinchas taught classes as a professor of nuclear medicine and founded the Institute of Nuclear Medicine at the Sheba Medical Center near Ramat Gan. He collaborated with his wife’s uncle, Moshe Stavi, on expediting the publication of the Antopol Yizkor Book by contributing over twelve chapters about his personal experiences prior to and during the Holocaust, about the personalities of the town and about its physical geography. Gittel’s health had suffered during her years living in the forests with the partisans, so she was unable to continue her work as a pharmacist. She died from severe heart disease. Sometime after Gittel’s death, Pinchas married Manya Krasowitskaya Czerniawsky, a widow who was the mother of David Shaham, the husband of Pinchas’ youngest daughter Yehudit. 4.5.1. Irit (Iruni) Czerniak Weiss (b.1941) was raised for the first two years of her life by a single Christian woman named Vera Okhritz, who had been a patient of her father’s. In order to protect both of them from the Nazis and their informers, Vera raised Iruni as a Christian. At the end of World War II, Iruni’s parents reclaimed their child from her foster mother and moved to Poland. In 1950, Iruni made Aliyah with her parents and two younger siblings. After moving to Israel, Iruni’s name was changed to Irit. Irit is a retired lawyer married to Ben Zion (Benny) Weiss, a retired engineer. They have two children. Irit’s parents openly shared the story about how Irit had lived with Vera for the first two years of her life. Although Irit was aware of the facts, she wondered about this woman who had protected and raised her as a baby. For years, Irit always felt as if a piece of her personal history was missing from her life. As an adult, Irit often thought about the bravery and love that Vera had shown her but had no tangible connection to or memory of Vera. Irit had heard, like many people searching for their roots, that many homes and public buildings in Antopol were ruined, and that no-one who had been born there could recognize the town. She feared it would be futile to try to return there for answers and believed that those early years would always remain a mystery to her. Nonetheless, compelled by her desire to fill in the blanks from her childhood, Irit and her husband Benny tried to reach Antopol via Poland sometime in 1991, very soon after Russia opened the borders. Although they had all of the proper documents, they were not Irit and Benny Weiss – 2008 The Czerniak Family ca. 1954. Left to right: Back row: Iruni (Irit) and Tzila. Seated: Pinchas, Gittel, Frumtche Troyky (Gittel’s sister), Moshe Stavi (Gittel’s uncle). Front row: Avraham (Rami) and Yehudit. DESCENDANTS OF GENIA GITTEL FELDSZTEJN AND PINCHAS CZERNIAK 28 |                    
  | 29 permitted to cross the border into Belarus. They returned home despondent, with no idea what had become of Antopol or if Vera was still living there. In 2005, Dvorah Netzer and her daughter Ruti went to Belarus with a group to research the family roots. Although they were also told that Antopol no longer existed, Dvorah insisted on trying to find Antopol and arranged a day trip to the area. Three other people from the group joined them. What they found was a quiet, small town on the main road from Kobryn to Pinsk. It is no longer the Jewish town as it was before World War II. (See the PAPPE chapter for photos of Modern Day Antopol.) With the help of an interpreter, Dvorah was able to communicate with people and ask questions about our ancestors. An excerpt of her narrative of this trip and what she discovered follows: When we arrived in Antopol, we saw that it was a live city, and that the main landmarks existed. It was clear that Jewish Antopol no longer existed. I decided to interview old people to see if they remembered any of the family. No one remembered the name Pappe – which was not surprising, since our family left Antopol before they were born. No one remembered Stawski, but many remembered Dr. Czerniak. One couple told us that the old woman who hid Czerniak’s daughter is still alive. We all “ran” to the house where she lived. At first, she claimed that she did not know the family, but seeing our genuine interest, she started to tell us the story we already knew about Irit, but from her own point of view. When she took out a photo of Irit as a child, it was the same one that I had seen in the Antopol Yizkor Book. We both cried. We explained to her why Irit never contacted her (Vera didn’t know that borders and communications were closed), and I promised to tell Irit, which I did as soon as we returned to Israel. Irit was shocked and happy! She immediately started planning to travel to Antopol. Within only three weeks’ time Irit, her husband Benny and her sister Yehudit arrived in Antopol to reunite with Vera. At first, Vera expressed disappointment and anger and was hurt about all those years without any communication. Eventually, she opened up, which gave Irit a chance to reconcile with Vera and with her past. Vera had saved some of Irit’s clothing from when she was a toddler. After they were reunited, Vera gave these mementos to Irit for safekeeping. After their reunion, Irit and Benny visited Vera every year, including one trip with their two children and a granddaughter, Chen. In recognition of Vera’s humanity and courage, the Weiss family succeeded in arranging for Vera to receive the Righteous Among the Nations Award from Yad VaShem, which honors non-Jews who risked their own lives in saving Jews from certain death. This is a very special story about very special people, and the continuous search for meaning and destiny in our personal lives. 4.5.1.1. Einat Weiss Weissbort (b.1966) has a master’s in business administration. She is the founder and CEO of Derech Isha, a company which helps organizations improve gender balance. She is married to David Weissbort, an engineer, and they have four children. 4.5.1.1.1. Gal Weissbort Ronen (b.1991) is a lawyer and accountant married to Omer Ronen. 4.5.1.1.2. Chen Weissbort (b.1993) is an engineer. 4.5.1.1.3. Amit Weissbort (b.1996) is an information system specialist. 4.5.1.1.4. Shani Tamar Weissbort (b.2004). 4.5.1.2. Erez Weiss (b.1969) is a lawyer married to Osnat Yair, a voice-over artist. They have three children: Ofek (b.2000), Almog (b.2002) and Aviv (b.2005). 4.5.2. Tzila Czerniak Zwas (b.1945) was born in Antopol after her parents had returned from living in the nearby forests as partisans. She is an internationally known doctor of Nuclear Medicine. Before retirement, Tzila was the Head of the Nuclear Medicine Department in the Rabin Medical Center at Hasharon Hospital. Tzila is the widow of Gideon Zwas (1939-2000), a beloved professor in the Department of Applied Mathematics of Tel Aviv University. They had two children who both live in Tel Aviv. 4.5.2.1. Gila Zwas (b.1972) has a master’s in biology and works in the Bio-Medical field. 4.5.2.2. Eyal Zwas (b.1980) is a lawyer, who owns and manages several real estate companies. He is divorced from Eynat Alon, who is a lawyer. Eyal and Eynat have two daughters: Lia (b.2012) and Bar-Beeri (b.2017). 4.5.3. Avraham (Rami) Czerniak (1948-2013) was born in Breslau, Poland after his parents left Antopol. He was an internationally known surgeon who specialized in liver transplants and served as a department head at the Wolfson Hospital in Holon, near Tel Aviv. He was married to Ofra Solomon, a Tel Aviv district court judge. They had two children. 4.5.3.1. Arik Czerniak (b.1975) is an entrepreneur and writer. 4.5.3.2. Sharona Czerniak (b.1978) is a well-known plastic surgeon. Sharona and her first husband, Sagi Rathaus, have one child named Daniel. Ten days before her father’s death, she married her soulmate, Oz Yakir, at her father’s bedside. They have two children. The reunion of Irit Czerniak Weiss with Vera Okhritz in 2005. Vera Okhritz holding the Righteous Among the Nations Award with Irit Czerniak Weiss holding her hand. Irit (Iruni) Czerniak at age 2 (from the Antopol Yizkor Book). Tzila Czerniak Zwas Avraham (Rami) Czerniak 30 |                    
  | 31 4.5.4. Yehudit Czerniak Shaham (b.1951) was born in Israel after her parents made Aliyah. She is a doctor specializing in occupational and environmental medicine. She directed the Department for Employees of the Public Service in the Ministry of Health. Yehudit founded and was director of the Research Department of Occupational Causes of Cancer in the National Institute for Occupational and Environmental Medicine for ten years until it was closed. She leads research in the area of the influences of the exposure to cancerogenic agents and has gained an international reputation in this field. Yehudit was the head of the Department for Occupational and Environmental Medicine in the Tel Aviv University Medical School. She is Chairman of the Supreme Appeals Committees for work capacity and Advisor for occupational cancer. Yehudit is married to David Shaham, an engineer. They have three children. 4.5.4.1. Hagay Shaham (b.1976) is an architect. He is divorced from Natalie Solomon and they have a daughter, Yael (b.2010). 4.5.4.2. Matan Shaham (b.1979) is a product manager married to Michal Carmi, a human resources manager. They have three children: Gali (b.2012), Yuval (b.2015) and Noga (b.2020). 4.5.4.3. Shira Shaham Niv (b.1986) is a co-founder and operations manager of a startup company which develops diagnostic kits for early detection of diseases. She is married to Omer Niv, a DevOps Engineer. They have three children: Kfir (b.2013), Noam (b.2016) and Ariel (b.2019). 4.6. Raizel (Rosa) Paitze Feldsztejn (1907-1942) was the sixth child of Tsivya and Yosef David Feldsztejn. The only information we have about her is from the Page of Testimony submitted by her sister Genia to Yad VaShem, where she states that Rosa-Raisel was murdered in the Holocaust, together with her husband Shlomo (1906-1942) and their daughter, Rivka (1935-1942) in Pinsk. See the appendix for the Page of Testimony. •5. DOV BER (BERL) STAWSKI (1881-1941) Dov Ber was the fourth child of Yaakov Shmuel and Riva Stawski. He was born in Antopol and later went to study for the rabbinate in Warsaw where his younger brother Moshe was already living. Rav Dov Ber may have had a first wife who died, because he is listed as a widower when he married Ida Tubert (unk.-1954). Rav Dov Ber and Ida had two daughters, Sarah and Maya Malka. Rav Dov Ber was an educated, religious person, who moved around quite a bit. He tried his luck as a rabbi in Mendoza, Argentina, where his wife’s family lived, but was not happy there. We know about his feelings from a letter dated March 20, 1925 written from Mendoza to his brother Moshe Stavi. He laments how “dry” the country is, that people are walking around with guns and knives, using them to solve their problems and that it is extremely unsafe for women. He also asks Moshe to help him immigrate to the Holy Land. Rav Dov Ber made the necessary arrangements to go to the Holy Land in 1926, bringing his family with him from Argentina. They lived with his brother Moshe when they arrived. In 1928, Rav Dov Ber and his family returned to Russia, where he served as a rabbi in Kiev and in Crimea. In another letter to Moshe, after returning to Russia, he explains how disappointed he was with life in the Holy Land and expounds on his belief that the best way to build up the Holy Land is by raising awareness and funding from Europe. Beginning in 1936, letters from Rav Dov Ber to Moshe show that he’s had a change of heart due to the deteriorating and increasingly dangerous living conditions in Russia. He begs Moshe to send certificates to allow the family to escape Russia and return to British Palestine, but the certificates were never received. One of these letters is reproduced in the appendix. As the Nazis approached, Ida, Malka, her husband and her infant son Yuly were able to escape to another part of Russia which was not an immediate target. Rav Dov Ber did not fully grasp the threat that the Germans posed and insisted on staying with his other daughter Sara, who could not manage to run away from the enemy since she was handicapped. They were both murdered by the Nazis in Babi Yar9 near Kiev, Russia. The photos shown below of the Babi Yar memorial were taken by Dvorah Netzer in 2005. Rav Dov Ber’s surviving daughter, Maya Malka, submitted a Page of Testimony to Yad VaShem for her father (see appendix). He is also memorialized on the wall of the Antopol Synagogue in Tel Aviv with the following words: Dov Ber, son of Yaakov Shmuel Stawski, poured water on the hands of the Gaon Rav Rabinowitz. $ !+ K$        DW#$F#M
"DDXX#LZ

Babi Yar, a ravine northwest of the city. This was one of the largest 
&



[[
<<> 



Yehudit and David Shaham – 2016. Babi Yar Memorial The stone markers in the overgrown forest at Babi Yar The Children’s Memorial at Babi Yar L to R: Dov Ber, Sarah and Ida Stawski. 32 |                    
  | 33 5.1. Sarah Stawski (1906-1941) was born in Kiev with a foot deformity, causing her to limp. Sarah was murdered by the Nazis in Babi Yar together with her father in 1941. 5.2. Maya Malka Stawski Korobov (1913-1991) was born in Kremenchug. She married Mordechai Morduch Korobov (1905- 1995). They had one son, Yuly, and later immigrated to the USA, settling in St. Louis, Missouri. 5.2.1. Yuly Korobov (b.1936) was born in Kiev. He immigrated to the USA with his parents, his wife Zhana Auerbach and their two daughters in 1981. Yuly was a science professor in Russia, but in the USA, he worked for a chemical company. Zhana also worked as a chemist. When they retired, they moved to Florida. 5.2.1.1. Irina Korobov Simmons (b.1966) is a nurse who was born in Kiev. She married Dr. Jerry Simmons, a neurologist, and they live in Houston, Texas. They have two children: Ariel (b.1996) and Camille (b.1998). 5.2.1.2. Victorya Korobov (b.1976) is a therapist who lives in Chicago, Illinois. •6. MOSHE (STAWSKI) STAVI (1884-1964) Moshe was the fifth child of Yaakov Shmuel and Riva Stawski. Born in Antopol, he became a renowned Yiddish and Hebrew writer. As a youth, he worked with his father in Antopol and in Kremenchug. In 1907, Moshe moved to Warsaw, where he published the first of his many written works. In Warsaw, Moshe met and married Rosa Lebensbaum (1887-1952) and they made Aliyah in 1911. Moshe visited Antopol whenever he could, to see his parents and siblings, even after he moved to Eretz Yisrael. Moshe and Rosa’s son Na’aman was born in 1911 in the Holy Land. When he was a year old, his mother Rosa left the family and returned to Poland for reasons unknown to us. From there, she went to live in the USA where she remarried, becoming a famous Yiddish poet under the pen name of Anna Margolin. Moshe was left with the sole responsibility of raising his son, to whom he was devoted. Moshe and Na’aman lived in moshav Beer Tuvia for several years where they raised animals. While living there, Moshe continued his literary work, writing about Antopol, nature, animals, the life of the Arabs and the Hebrew language. Moshe met a woman there named Rina Mordechovitch Grabelsky from Korelitz in Belarus. She had come to the Holy Land in 1920 with her nine-year-old daughter (who now lives in the USA with her family). Rina helped Moshe take care of his son Na’aman and became Moshe’s life partner. Moshe was a prolific writer and an activist for Antopol. He helped to expedite the publication of the monumental Antopol Yizkor Book, cited frequently in this chapter. His home was always open to visitors. Although he had a huge heart, Moshe could be critical and acerbic in his conversations and his writing, sometimes alienating people the around him. In his copious written correspondence with family members, Moshe Stavi mentioned that he was in contact with his sister-in-law Bashkeh in Antopol and with Bashkeh’s father, Rav Netanel Chaim Pappe, and her brother, Rav Yisrael Yitschak Pappe, in Palestine. These letters are evidence that there was contact between the Pappe and the Stawski families. The family connection extended to the New York relatives as well. As noted above, Harry Stawski, Bashkeh and Ephrayim’s son, signed as a witness to his cousin Samuel Felder’s Petition for Naturalization. One of the letters from Moshe Stavi to Akiva Ben Ezra is reproduced in the appendix. His letters have been an invaluable source for information about life in the Jewish shtetl and for descriptions of his family members’ state of mind. 6.1 Na’aman Stavi (1911-1982) became a supervisor in the Police Force. During the War of Independence, he served as a deputy to David Shaltiel10 and Dov Yosef,11 who shared responsibility for the city of Jerusalem. Na’aman was married twice, first to Tsila Ne’eman (1912-1976) and later to Shulamith (Pita) Branitsky (1924-2014). Pita’s daughter, Diana, from her first marriage to Peter Ribek, grew up as a daughter to Na’aman. 6.1.1. Jonathan Stavi is Na’aman’s son from his first marriage. He was born in Israel. 6.1.2. Shoshana Stavi was also born in Israel. She is Na’aman’s daughter from his second marriage. •7. PINCHAS (PHILIP) STAWSKI (1888-1979) Pinchas was the sixth child of Yaakov Shmuel and Riva Stawski. When he immigrated to the USA from Antopol around 1910, Pinchas changed his first name to Philip. He lived in New York, first in Manhattan and later in the Bronx. According to a notation on his Declaration of Intention for US Citizenship, reproduced in the appendix, Philip worked as a cutter, probably in a clothing factory or possibly at Felder Brothers Leather Co. Philip married Bessie Chesler (1901-1965) and they had two children. Although he did not visit his family in Eretz Yisrael, Philip exchanged letters regularly with his brother Moshe. These letters, which were preserved by family members, give us invaluable information about his family. For example, in 1925, in answer to Moshe’s query if he too will come to live in Eretz Yisrael, Philip wrote that he “lives like a lord and more in America.” Another letter written to Moshe on July 8, 1945, confirms that Philip was aware that his brother Berl (Dov Ber) and Berl’s daughter Sarah had been killed in the Holocaust. 10 >
\-
David Shaltiel was the commander of the Haganah in Jerusalem during the Arab siege of Jerusalem during the War of Independence in 1948. 11 Dov Yosef was the milit
L
#$F?[
< =
Z Moshe (Stawski) Stavi Maya Korobov with her son Yuly Korobov ca. 1954 Moshe and Na’aman Stavi L to R: Henry, Bessie, Philip and Esther Stawski ca. 1936 34 |                    
  | 35 7.1. Chaim Reuven (Henry) Stawski Stone (1923-2016) was a salesman of industrial plastic used for manufacturing photo album sleeves or wallet inserts. He loved to play handball and continued playing until he was in his 80s. Henry met his future wife, Joan Roth, at the Bronx playground where young people gathered. Joan was a professional opera singer who performed in off-Broadway and summer stock theater. When her first child was born, Joan became a full-time homemaker. Henry and Joan’s daughter Tracey Peretz explained that her parents changed their family name to Stone before their first child was born, to protect their children from anti-Semitism. Henry and Joan shared a love of opera and often attended performances at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City. Joan still lives in the house where they raised their three children in Oceanside, NY. 7.1.1. Jeffrey Scott (Yaakov Shmuel) Stone (b.1961) is an electrical engineer who is married to Irene Mary Gerry. They have one son and live in New York. 7.1.2. Matthew Brian (Mordechai Berl) Stone (1963-2019) was an electrical engineer who was passionate about music. He played guitar and keyboard and had a keen interest in architecture. 7.1.3. Tracey Amanda Stone Peretz (b.1965) is a Senior Vice President of Servicing Communications Strategy at Citibank. She is married to Rami Peretz, an Israeli, who is a real estate appraiser. They live in Valley Stream, Long Island and have two children. 7.1.3.1. Shira Maye Peretz (b.1996) is a third-grade teacher. 7.1.3.2. Ben Moshe Peretz (b.1999) is pursuing a career in music engineering. 7.2. Esther (Terry) Stawski Marshall (b.1926) was a high school mathematics teacher before her retirement. She married David Marshall (b.1924), a chemist by training, who manufactured machinery for the cosmetics and pharmaceutical industry before his retirement. Both in their 90’s, Terry and David live independently in Long Island, NY. They are quite active, going to the gym and playing bridge. Terry and David’s daughters and grandchildren visit them often. Joan and Henry Stawski (Stone) Wedding – 1949 DESCENDANTS OF HENRY AND JOAN STAWSKI-STONE The Peretz Family. L to R: Tracey, Ben, Shira and Rami. Wedding of Terry and David Marshall – 1949. DESCENDANTS OF TERRY ESTHER STAWSKI AND DAVID MARSHALL Terry Esther Stawski            
David Irwin Marshall            
Mona Leslie (Malka Leah) Marshall            
Steven Paul Solomon             
Lindsey Phillip Solomon             !" 
Haylee Alexa Solomon             !" 
Jamie Lauren Solomon #           
Randye Beth Marshall            
Martin Nicholas Friedrichs           $%"&' 
Kyle Samuel Friedrichs #          ('%'' 
Kathryn (Katie) Anne Thompson #  Claire Elizabeth Friedrichs   Lily Grace Friedrichs #  Luke Alexander Friedrichs   Tamara Bess Friedrichs #           )) * Vincent Turturro #+  Mina Ellis Turturro                       
            


             
         
           *' ./%" 
! " #            
        
$ %         
#           ;/ <'= 
"                 &         
            *' ./%" 
'         
           ;/ <'= 
 *        +            <'  " *        +            
& "
*        +            
36 |                    
  | 37 7.2.1. Mona Leslie (Malka Leah) Marshall Solomon (b.1952) attended medical school in Italy and received her doctorate in surgery. Mona went back to school for a master’s in bio-nutrition and worked as a nutritionist while raising their three children. As her children became more independent, Mona became a tutor for standardized testing. She was married to Steven Paul Solomon (1953- 2021), who worked in health care administration. 7.2.1.1. Lindsey Phillip Solomon (b.1992) is the founder of Lindsey Media, a fashion and lifestyle communications firm in New York. 7.2.1.2. Haylee Alexa Solomon (b.1994) has a doctorate in physical therapy. 7.2.1.3. Jamie Lauren Solomon (b.1998) has an economics degree and is working as an administrative assistant. 7.2.2. Randye Beth Marshall Friedrichs (b.1955) is married to Martin Friedrichs. They live in New Rochelle, NY, and have two children. Randye and Martin run a family business together, along with their daughter Tamara, called Westchester Stairlift LLC. Randye handles the administrative side and Martin, who has an industrial engineering background and years of experience in the health care industry, is the founding partner. They love to travel and take bike trips together. Martin is a prolific genealogist who has been extremely generous in sharing information and photos with us for this book. Martin has a daughter, Natasha Iris Friedrichs Fapohunda (b.1978), from his first marriage. Martin had joint custody of Natasha so he and Randye raised Natasha as their own and later as a big sister to their children. Natasha is married to Ayo Daniel Fapohunda who spent part of his childhood in Nigeria, the home of his father. They have three children: Giselle (b.2011), Shegun Jacob (b.2013) and Baraka Joseph (b.2015). 7.2.2.1. Kyle Samuel Friedrichs (b.1985) is an engineer married to Kathryn (Katie) Anne Thompson, a special education teacher. They have three children. 7.2.2.2. Tamara Bess Friedrichs Turtorro (b.1989) is the marketing and logistics manager for the family business, Westchester Stairlift, LLC. She is married to Vincent Michael Turturro, a filmmaker. They have one daughter. •8. EUGENIA (GENIA) GOLDA STAWSKI LEVIN (1891-1961) Eugenia was probably the youngest child of Yaakov Shmuel and Riva Stawski and was known affectionately as Goldie. She trained as a doctor of gynecology in Warsaw, and practiced in Stavropol, Russia. She married Wulf Levin (1886-1952), who was a paramedic and pharmacist. The couple had one daughter. Living in a remote town in Russia saved this family from becoming victims of the Holocaust.. 8.1. Dina Levin Zlotver (1922-1977) married Aizik (Isaac) Ika Zlotver (1919-1980). They met in Stavropol in 1949, when Ika returned home to Russia for the first time in eight years from East Germany, where he was stationed with the Russian army. Ika served in the army as an engineering corps officer, building missile bunkers. When Dina and Ika met, it was love at first sight and they were married within a week. The couple had two children, Luba and Vladimir. Ika remained in the Russian army until his discharge in 1965. He and Dina wanted to immigrate to Israel, but Russian authorities prevented them from leaving the USSR. They feared that Ika might reveal sensitive secrets from his army years. He was told that he would have to wait ten years before the government would allow him to leave the country. Their children made Aliyah individually, Luba in 1971 and Vladimir in 1973. In 1975, Ika and Dina became Refuseniks12 when they were once again denied permission to leave the country. In 1977, Dina died of breast cancer in Sverdlovsk (Dovzhansk in modern Ukraine) after Sverdlovsk still awaiting consent from the Soviet authorities. After Dina’s death, Luba appealed to international authorities, hoping to find a way to convince the Russian government to allow her father to make Aliyah and be reunited with his children and grandchildren. She traveled to the USA and Europe where she met with congressmen, non-Jewish activists and Jewish organizations like the National Conference on Soviet Jewry and the Union of Councils for Soviet Jewry, which were all trying to convince the Russian government to allow Refuseniks like her father to leave the country. Finally, Luba’s meeting with the Chancellor of Austria, Bruno Kreisky, sparked an outpouring of protests from the worldwide community. Innumerable articles appeared in newspapers about the plight of the Refuseniks and specifically about Ika’s struggle to gain permission to leave the USSR. During the years that his daughter Luba was attempting to gain his freedom, Ika struggled to deal with the sadness of losing his beloved wife and his feelings of hopelessness. Eventually, he died alone in a hospital on April 4, 1980, also of cancer. Ironically, relatives who came to his funeral from afar, found his exit visa from the Russian authorities waiting in his mailbox. Unfortunately, it arrived too late. 12 Refusenik




^+L 

+;
_
<



 >
&="
-
%ORefusenik, trapped in the Soviet Union*`j>q#$?#/ Randye and Martin Friedrichs Wulf, Dina and Goldie Levin ca. 1924. Dina Levin Zlotver 38 |                    
  | 39 Luba and Simcha Bar Menachem DESCENDANTS OF DINA LEVIN AND ISAAC ZLOTVER Two of the notices about Dina and Ika’s struggle to get permits to make Aliyah via the Jewish Telegraphic Agency are transcribed below: July 26, 1977 Dina Zlotver, a Soviet Jewish activist who had petitioned Soviet authorities to immigrate to Israel with her husband since December 1974, to rejoin her son and daughter, died of cancer in her hometown of Sverdlovsk, according to information reaching the National Conference on Soviet Jewry. Soviet authorities have not indicated if her husband will be allowed to emigrate. Appeal for Parent, July 28, 1977. NEW YORK (Jul. 27) The son and daughter of Dina Zlotver, a Soviet Jewish activist who died of cancer last week in her hometown of Sverdlovsk, have appealed to the Soviet Union to allow their father to join them in Israel, the Student Struggle for Soviet Jewry and the Union of Councils for Soviet Jewry reported today. The daughter, Luba Bar Menachem, and the son, Vladimir Zlotver, said their mother “wanted to live in Israel with her children and grandchildren. For the last three years both she and our father, Isaac, have been suffering from cancer. Yet the responsible authorities refused and refused and refused again and again to give them permission to leave. There was no reason to refuse this permission. They are in possession of no secrets. Both were ailing and now our father is alone, his beloved wife Dina, our mother, is dead.” Noting that their father now has no one to care for him, his children urged Americans to “use whatever influence you can to persuade the Soviet authorities to let him [their father] go immediately. Do not let our father, Isaac Zlatne [Zlotver], die alone in Sverdlovsk.” 8.1.1. Luba Zlotver Bar Menachem (b.1950) was born in Stavropol, Russia. Growing up, her mother read Luba a story written by Moshe Stavi, Dina’s uncle, who lived in Israel. When Luba made Aliyah from Russia with her youth group in 1971 she was “adopted” by Moshe’s son Na’aman (Moshe had passed away) and they became very close. When Na’aman died, he bequeathed all of his father’s letters to Luba who has preserved them and shared them with us. You will notice that many of Moshe Stavi’s letters, quoted in this book, give us an accurate picture of life at the time he wrote them. Luba met her future husband, Dr. Simcha Bar Menachem, an internist, during her first months in Israel. Luba is a talented Dina Levin 1922 - 1977 d: Sverdlovsk Isaac Zlotver 1919 - 1980 b: Rostov-Don d: Sverdlovsk Luba Zlotver 1950 - b: Stavropol, Caucasus Simcha Bar Menachem 1945 - b: Tel Aviv Manny Bar Menachem 1975 - 1993 b: Vienna d: IDF Dina Bar Menachem 1980 - b: Vienna James David Routin 1969 - 2012 d: Michigan, USA Ronald Pyle Ika Bar Menachem 1981 - b: Jerusalem Shani Uzan Gomeh Bar Menachem 2013 - b: Tel Aviv Arad Bar Menachem 2015 - Vladimir Zlotver 1952 - 2007 b: Sverdlovsk d: Tel Aviv 40 |                    
  | 41 artist whose work originally concentrated on works of Judaica, including ketubahs. Her artistic creations include scrapbooking, creating personalized albums for her friends and clients, collage and sewing dolls. Luba and Simcha live in Jerusalem and had three children. 8.1.1.1. Manny Bar Menachem (1976-1994) died at the age of 18 while serving as a paratrooper in the Israel Defense Forces. 8.1.1.2. Dina Bar Menachem (b.1980) was born in Israel and is a poet with a master’s of Hebrew literature and poetry. Dina was sadly widowed soon after her wedding to James David Routin. She lives near Detroit, Michigan where she works in the Public Relations department at the Southfield, Michigan JCC. She also writes and teaches poetry. In 2019, Dina married Ronald Pyle. 8.1.1.3. Ika Bar Menachem (b.1981) works in the high-tech industry for Microsoft. He and his wife, Shany Uzan, have two children: Gomeh (b.2013) and Arad (b.2015). 8.1.2. Vladimir Zeev Zlotver (1952-2007) made Aliyah in 1973 and was never married. He suffered with asthma from childhood, which contributed to his early death. Our heartfelt thanks go to the extended Stawski/Stawsky family members for their invaluable help and insight. Their contributions led to a rich, detailed chapter brimming with history. Dina Bar Menachem and Ronald Pyle – 2019 1922 Letter from Yaacov Shmuel Stawski to his son Moshe Stavi. Stawski Appendix 42 |                    
  | 43 Yad VaShem Page of Testimony for Miriam Mirel Stawsky Messer. Letter dated September 21, 1962 from Moshe Stavi to Akiva Ben Ezra which includes information about the Stawski family in Antopol and about Pappe connections in Jerusalem. 44 |                    
  | 45 Translation of Fradle Stawski Barachenko’s Russian Wikipedia Page Faina (Fanni) Efremovna Stavskaja (19, Nov. 1890, Antopol, Uezd Kobrin, Gubernia Grodno now Rayon Drogitsinky (District),          
        





 
!" 
 
# $
% 
&

!
' *  +-//"+-/3 


. BIOGRAPHY Before 1917 From Meshany, daughter of an official, received home schooling. 1906-07 was a member of Anarcho-Kommu group and was active in Revolutionary activities in Grodno, Bialystok, Kobrin, Purzhany, was arrested short term several times. From 1907, was living illegally in Ekaterinoslav There she was active in terrorist work. On May 17th, she perpetuated a terrorist act against the Governor of Ekaterinoslav A.M. Klinger (1860-1909) by preparing to blow up the Hotel France. Several days later, the newspaper Russkoye Slovo [Russian World] wrote: “Yesterday, an unknown woman who said she was French, booked a room in the Hotel France. When she left the room, there was a terrible explosion that destroyed the room and blew out all the glass in the windows. The Hotel was cordoned off by the police and access was prohibited.” She was arrested on June 18, 1908. On September 24, 1911, she was tried and found guilty by a temporary Military Court and got 20 years of forced labor in Riga, Yaroslav, Ribinsk. While in prison, she was opposed to prisoners who were petitioning to have their prison time shortened in honor of the 300-year anniversary of Romanov’s dynasty. She was released in February 1917. With some other released female prisoners, Faina Stavski arrived in Petrograd, where they were celebrated with festive receptions for a month, which later continued in Moscow. Afterwards, the women were sent to rest and recover in Crimea, where she met her future husband, Victor Barachenko. From September 1917, she worked in the newspaper in Simferopol and took part in party work in Sevastopol. In September 1918 she moved to Moscow and joined the Jewish unit of revolutionaries led by Grigory Semyonov. She was arrested twice (in 1919 and 1921) and was released after three and a half months. From September 1922 to 1933, she took several jobs in different organizations. From 1933-1937, she was the Director of the State Historical Museum and State Historical Library. Most of the staff of the Library consisted of people who were not loyal to the Revolution. When Faina took on this new job without any previous knowledge about working in a library, the Party trusted her with Communist Loyalty. She suggested many changes that were accepted by the Party and she got a budget to implement these changes. The Library became independent of the Museum. Faina organized different exhibitions      Fradle Stawski Barachenko Russian Wikipedia – first page. 46 |                    
  | 47 connected to important Revolutionary dates. She posted quotations from Lenin on the walls. Sixty-five people worked there as well as student volunteers. Her revolutionary activities, her terrorist experience and close friendship with Fanni Kaplan, were not forgotten by the Soviets and so she was arrested on April 30, 1937, based on the accusation that she was part of an anti-Soviet Counter-revolutionary organization. After her arrest, there was a Communist Party meeting at the library where they expelled her from the Party as an Enemy of the Nation, someone with intentions of sabotage and murder of the leaders of the Party. Her co-workers claimed that all mistakes made during her tenure as Director of the Library were done maliciously. Her name is listed in “Stalin’s Death Lists” as “Executed 13, June 1937, Cremated.” Her remains were secretly buried near Donsky Crematorium. The destiny of F. Stawsky was not known to her relatives for many years. In March 1956, B.E. Barachenko applied to the military court asking to revise her case. On November 30, 1956, he received her certificate of death: Date of Death was indicated as 13 November 1942, the cause and place of death were left empty. On April 27, 1957, he received an official paper saying that on the 23rd of April 1957, her case was revised by the military section the Supreme Court of the USSR. Previous court decisions of July 13, 1937 were cancelled because they did not find any criminal activity so F. Stavskaja was rehabilitated posthumously. On September 3, 1957, she was also rehabilitated by the Communist Party, which cancelled her expulsion from the Party on July 15, 1937. The destiny of her son – Vladimir Stawsky – was also very tragic. He was drafted to the army during WWII. He participated in fighting in western Ukraine and Moldavia. He died after the war while he was still in the Army. No details of his death are known. He was buried in Moscow. In the time of “warming” after the rehabilitation of F. Stawsky, her husband, Soviet Party Activist Victor Barachenko wrote a monograph on her life entitled The Life and Death of Faina Stawsky which was never published. Written from 1957-1961, this manuscript is now in the private archive of Barachenko in central Moscow archive/museum of private collections. Those memoirs and his oral stories are quoted by several writers when they tell the story of the summer romance between Fanni Caplan and Dimitry Ulyanov (younger brother of Lenin), which took place in Yevpatoria in the summer of 1917. Translation of Viktor Moshe Barachenko’s Russian Wikipedia Page VICTOR EREMEEVITS BARACHENKO (1892 Kishinev-1980) Russian revolutionary, industrial worker at the time of Socialist construction, memoire writer, writer of essays and short stories about revolution activists. BIOGRAPHY - He was raised in orphanage. He studied in evening school. From 1909, he worked as an office worker in business company. He participated in the Anarchistic and then in Social-Democratic Movement in Kishinev. - Deputy of Kishinev Soviet of Workers Deputies (1917). Participated in Civil War, then worked to organize workers’ unions in Kishinev and Crimea. - Deputy of IV Russian Congress of Unions (1921) - 1922-1929 worked in an organization connected to industry and chemistry. Member of Communist Party until 1937 and from 1956. From 1957, retired with personal pension. - He is the author of multiple unpublished memoirs about the Revolution Movement and early stages of development of Socialist Industry and Farming. Based on those materials, he prepared and printed the biography of U.P. Gaven (Series “Life of Outstanding People”) and posthumously, a collection of biographical short stories was printed about Communist heroes of Russia and Moldavia. - He is an author of the unpublished book entitled “The Life and Death of Faina Stavski”. (1957-1961) A copy of the manuscript is in the Central Moscow Archives Museum private collections. - The story of the summer romance between Dmitry Ulyanov (Lenin’s brother) and Fanny Kaplan is based on his memoirs. WIFE – Faina Efremovna Stavsja (1890-1937), revolutionary anarchist, later Eser.13 At the end of her life, director of Historical Library, was repressed and killed. 13 Eser


+P+
P
%



\ 


KWth century in Imperial Russia. 48 |                    
  | 49 1923 Ship Manifest for Geshon (Harry) Stawsky. 1928 Petition for Naturalization of Harry Stawsky. 50 |                    
  | 51 1939 letter from Gershon Zvi Stawski to Moshe Stavi – page 1. Yad VaShem Page of Testimony for Gershon Zvi Stawski. 52 |                    
  | 53 1930 US Federal Census of New York for Frumtche, Meyer and David Troyky, with enlargement. Yad VaShem Page of Testimony for Rosa-Raizel Feldstejn. 54 |                    
  | 55 1926 letter from Dov Ber Stawski to Moshe Stavi. Yad VaShem Page of Testimony for Dov Ber Stawski, submitted by his by his niece Chana Markuze. 56 |                    
  | 57 Declaration of Intention for US Citizenship of Philip (Pinchas) Stawski, submitted in 1910. Additional Stawski Family Photos Yaakov Shmuel, toddler Goldie and Riva Stawski ca. 1893. Genia (Goldie) Stawski and her brother Moshe. Genia (Goldie) Stawski and her brother Gershon Zvi. Three Stawski brothers, left to right Pinchas (Philip), Moshe and Ephrayim (Fruim) ca. 1910. 58 |                    
  | 59 Left to right: Abraham Feldstein, Goldie Stawski, Beryl Stawski. Left to right: Chana Stawski (daughter of Michael Stawsky), Moshe Stavi, Na’aman Stavi (Moshe’s son), Malka and Sarah Stawski (daughters of Dov Ber Stawski) – ca. 1926 or 1927. Esther (Terry) and Henry Stawski ca. 1933. Luba, Dina and Vladimir Zlotver, ca. 1958. Left to right: Luba, Ika, Genya, Dina, Vladimir and Malka Zlotver, in Yalta, 1961. 60 |                    
  | 61 The families of Henry (Stawski) Stone and Terry (Stawski) Marshall – November 1998. From left to right: Back row: Jeffrey Stone, Matthew Stone, Ada Lio (Matthew’s girlfriend at the time), Henry Stone, Steven Solomon, Rami Peretz, David Marshall, Martin Friedrichs. Middle row: Lindsey Solomon, Christopher Stone, Tamara Friedrichs, holding Jamie Solomon, Kyle Friedrichs. Seated: Joan Roth Stone, Terry Stawski Marshall, Irene Stone, Mona Solomon, Haylee Solomon, Tracy Stone Peretz, Shira Peretz, Randye Marshall Friedrichs. May 2008 at Herodium. Left to right: Tzila Czerniak Zwas, David Shaham, Yehudit Czerniak Shaham, Irit Czerniak Weiss, Luba Zlotver Bar Menahem. Taken in summer of 2017 in New York at Randye Friedrichs’ home. Left to Right standing: Tracy Stone Peretz and Randye Marshall Friedrichs. Sitting: Tzila Czerniak Zwas and Terry Esther Stawski Marshall.